the following is a conversation with
vitalik butyrin co-creator of an author
of the white paper that launched a
theory 'm and ether which is a
cryptocurrency that is currently the
second largest digital currency after
bitcoin aetherium has a lot of
interesting technical ideas that are
defining the future of blockchain
technology and metallic is one of the
most brilliant people innovating in the
space today
unlike Satoshi Nakamoto the unknown
person or group that created Bitcoin
Vitalik is very well known and at a
young age is thrust into the limelight
as one of the main faces of the
technology that may redefine the nature
of money and all forms of digital
transactions in the 21st century this is
the artificial intelligence podcast if
you enjoy it subscribe on youtube review
it with 5 stars an apple podcast
supported on patreon or simply connect
with me on Twitter Alex Friedman spelled
Fri DM am as usual I'll do one or two
minutes of ads now and never any ads in
the middle that can break the flow of
the conversation I hope that works for
you and doesn't hurt the listening
experience quick summary of the ads to
sponsors masterclass and expressvpn
please consider supporting the podcast
by signing up to master class and master
class comm slash Lex and getting
expressvpn at expressvpn dot-com / Lex
pod
this show is sponsored by master class
sign up at master class comm / Lex to
get a discount and to support this
podcast when I first heard about master
class I honestly thought it was too good
to be true for $180 a year you get an
all-access pass to watch courses from
experts at the top of their field to
list some of my favorites Chris Hadfield
on space exploration Neil deGrasse Tyson
on scientific thinking and communication
will write the creator of SimCity
and Sims on game design I love that game
Jane Goodall on conservation Carlos
Santana one of my favorite guitarists on
guitar Gary Kasparov on chess obviously
I'm Russian I love Gary he Daniel
Negreanu on poker one of my favorite
poker players also Phil Ivey is gives a
course as well and many many more Chris
Hadfield explaining how Rockets work and
the experience of being launched into
space alone is worth the money by way of
advice for me the key is not to be
overwhelmed by the abundance of choice
pick three courses you want to complete
watch each all the way through from
start to finish it's not that long but
it's an experience that will stick with
you for a long time I promise it's
easily worth the money you can watch on
basically any device once again sign up
a master class comm / flex to get a
discount and to support this podcast
this show sponsored by expressvpn
download expressvpn comm / Lex pod to
get a discount to support this podcast
I've been using expressvpn for many
years I honestly love it it's easy to
use press the big power on button and
your privacy is protected and if you
like you can make it look like your
location is anywhere else in the world I
might be in Boston now but I can make it
look like I'm in New York London Paris
or anywhere else this has a large number
of obvious benefits for example
certainly it allows you to access
international versions of streaming
websites like the Japanese version of
Netflix
or the UK version of Hulu as you
probably know I was born in the Soviet
Union so sadly given my roots and
appreciation of Russian history and
culture my website and the website for
this podcast is blocked in Russia so
this is another example of where you can
use Express VPN to access sites like the
podcast that are not accessible in your
country expressvpn works on any device
you can imagine I use it on Linux shout
out to a bunch of Windows Android but
it's available everywhere else too
once again download it at expressvpn
comm slash Lex pod to get a discount and
to support this podcast and now here's
my conversation with vitalik uterine so
before we talk about the fundamental
ideas behind a theory I'm a
cryptocurrency perhaps it'd be nice to
to talk about the the origin story of
Bitcoin and the mystery of Satoshi
Nakamoto you give a talk that started
with sort of asking the question what
did Satoshi Nakamoto actually invent
maybe you could say who is so Toshi
Nakamoto and what did he invent sure so
Satoshi Nakamoto is the name by which we
know the person who originally came up
with Bitcoin so the reason why I say the
name by which we know is that this is a
yam anonymous fellow who has shown
himself to us only over the Internet
just step by here first publishing the
white paper for Bitcoin then releasing
the original source code for Bitcoin and
then talking to the very early Bitcoin
community on Bitcoin forums and and if
interacting with that but helping the
project along for a couple of years and
then at some point in late 2010 early
2011 he disappeared
so Bitcoin is a fairly unique project in
how it has this kind of mythical a kind
of quasi godlike founder who
just and if pops in he did the thing and
if I disappeared and we were somehow
just never heard from him again so in
2008 was so the white paper was the
first do you know the white paper was
the first time the name was actually
appears that oshina come on leave so so
how is it possible that the creator of
such a impactful project remains
anonymous that's a tough question
and there's no similarity to it in
history of technology as far as I'm
aware yeah
so one possibility is that it's healthy
knee because healthy knee was and have
also active in the Bitcoin community and
as halfa Nia in those two beginning
years and how is health any maybe I see
you one of the people at the end of
early cypherpunk community he was the
computer scientists computer scientists
cryptographers people interested in like
technology Internet freedom like those
kinds of topics it was the correct that
that rather he seemed to have been
involved in either the earliest or the
first transaction of bitcoins yes the
first transaction of ich werde was
between sister was she had a health in
him do you think he knew who Satoshi was
if he wasn't Satoshi you probably know
how is it possible to work so closely
with people and nevertheless not know
anything about their fundamental
identity it is this like a natural sort
of characteristic of the Internet like
if we were to think about it because you
and I just met now there's a there's a
depth of knowledge that we now have
about each other that's like physical
like my vision system is able to
recognize you
I can also verify your identity of
uniqueness like yep this like it's very
hard to fake you being you yes so the
internet the Internet has a
fundamentally different quality to it
which is just fascinating yeah I know
definitely interesting as I definitely
just know a lot of people just by their
internet
and next to me when I think of them like
I see their internet handles and one of
them has enough profile picture as this
kind of face that's kind of not quite
human with about your hand of
psychedelic colors and at and when I
visualize him I could just visualize
that that's not an actual face yeah you
are the creator of the second
well he's currently the second most
popular kept across e aetherium so on
this topic if we just stick on Satoshi
Nakamoto for a little bit longer you may
be the most qualified person to speak to
the psychology of this anonymity that
we're talking about mm-hmm like your
identity is known like we I've just
verified it but from your perspective
what are the benefits in creating a
cryptocurrency and then remaining
anonymous like if I can psychoanalyze
Satoshi Nakamoto is there something
interesting there or just a peculiar
quirk of him it definitely helps create
this kind of image of this mutual thing
that doesn't belong to anyone and then
you've created a project and because
you're anonymous and because you also
disappear or as unfortunately happened
to help any if that is him he ended up I
think dying of abou Gehrig's disease and
he's in a cryogenic freezer now but like
if you pop in and you'd and then you
created an in you're gone and all that's
remaining if that whole process is the
thing itself then like no one can go and
try to and if interpret any of your
other behavior and try to understand
like oh the like this person wrote this
thing in some essay ID at age 16 where
he expressed particular opinions about
democracy and so because of that this
project is like is a statement that's
dragons you this specific thing instead
it creates this environment where the
thing is what you make of it and it
doesn't have the yeah right the the
burden of your other idea
political thought and so on so so now
then we're sitting with you do you feel
the burden of being kind of the face of
aetherium I mean there's a very large
community of developers but nevertheless
you know is there like a burden
associated with that there definitely is
this is definitely a big reason why I've
been trying to kind of push for the
etherium ecosystem to become more
decentralized in many ways the just
encouraging a lot of kind of core cerium
work to happen outside of the etherium
foundation and if expanding the number
of people that are making different
kinds of decisions having multiple
software bill notations instead of one
and all of these things like there's a
lot of things that I've tried to do it
too and we've removed myself as a single
point of failure because that is
something that a lot of people criticize
me for so if you look at like the most
fundamentally successful open source
projects okay it seems that it's like a
sad reality when I think about it is it
seems to be that one person is a crucial
contributor often if you look a lioness
from from for Linux for the kernel that
is possible and I'm definitely not
planning to disappear
that's an interesting tension that
projects like this kind of desire a
single entity and yet they're
fundamentally distributed I don't know
if there's something interesting to say
about that kind of structure and
thinking about the future of
cryptocurrency does there need to be a
leader
there's different kinds of leaders you
know there's there's dictators who
control all the money there's people who
control organizations there's a kind of
high priests that just have themselves
have their twitter followers what kind
of leader are you would you say actually
a bit more in the hyper in the high
priests direction than before
yeah like I definitely actually don't do
all that much of kind of going around
and make ordering aetherium foundation
people to do things because I think
those things are important if there's
something that I do think it's important
I use I do just do usually I kind of say
it publicly or just gonna say it to
people and quite often projects just
gonna start doing it so let's ask the -
Safa cool question just about money
yeah what at the highest level is money
what is money it's a kind of game and
it's a game where we have points and
like if you have points there's this one
move where you can reduce your points by
a number and increase someone else's
voice by the same number and these it's
a fair game hopefully well it's one kind
of fair game like for example you know
you can have other kinds of fair games
like you're gonna have a game where if I
give someone a points and you give
someone a points and instead of that
person getting two points that person
gets four points and that's also fair
but no money is easy to kind of set up
for and it serves a lot of useful
functions and so it kind of just
survives in society as a meme for
thousands of years it's useful for the
storage of wealth useful for the
exchange of value and it's also useful
for words and nominating future payments
a unit of account
a unit of account so what if you look at
the history of money in human
civilization what just uh if you're a
student of history like how has its role
or just the mechanisms of money changed
over time in your view even if we just
look at the 20th century before and then
leading up to cryptocurrencies that's
something
think about yeah and I think like the
big thing in the 20th century is kind of
we saw a lot more intermediation
yes thank you I mean the first part is
and if the move from
Bing yeah adding more of different kinds
of banking and then we saw the move from
and if dollar is being backed by gold to
dollars being backed by gold that's only
redeemable by certain people $2 not
being backed by anything soo and it's
just this new system where you have a
bunch of free floating currencies and
then people like I'm getting and if bank
accounts and then those things becoming
electronic people getting accountable
payment processors that have account
bank accounts so so what do you make of
that
that's a fascinating so philosophical
idea that money might not be backed by
anything what is that like the
fascinating to you that money can exist
without being backed by something
physical it definitely is what do you
make of that like how how is that
possible is that stable if you look at
the future of human civilization is it
possible to have money at the large
scale it such a hugely productive and
rich societies be able to operate
successfully without money being backed
by anything physical feel like the
interesting thing about the 21st century
especially is that a lot of the
important valuable things are not backed
by anything like if you look at like
tech companies for example like
something like Twitter and like you
could theoretically imagine that if all
of the employees wanted to or they could
have kind of come together they would
quit and you know start working on
Twitter 2.0 and then the yeah of how you
will and just kind of build the exact
the the exact same product source
possibly build a better product and then
just and if continue on from there and
the original the original Twitter
would've just not have people left
anymore right like that
there is theoretically kind of code and
like IP that's owned by the company but
in reality
good programmers could probably read up
rewrite all that stuff in three months
so the like the reason why the thing has
value is just kind of network effects
and coordination problems right like
this employees in reality aren't going
to switch all at once and also the users
aren't all going to switch at once
because it's just difficult for them to
switch at once and so there's these and
of metastable and of equilibria in
interactions between thousands of
millions of people that are just
actually quite sticky even though if you
try to kind of assume that everyone's a
perfectly rational and kind of perfectly
slippery spherical cow they don't seem
to exist at all this that stickiness do
you have a sense a grasp of the sort of
the fun fundamental dynamic like the
physics of that stickiness it seems to
work but and I think some of the
cryptocurrency ideas kind of rely on it
working yeah it's you know it's the sort
of thing that's definitely been have
economically modeled a lot I wanna be a
kind of analogy of something as similar
that you often see in textbooks as like
what is say yeah government like if for
exactly
any person if people in a country just
like tomorrow suddenly had had the idea
that like the laws that are currently
the laws in the government that
currently is the government are just
people and some of us and some other
thing it is the government and they just
kind of start acting like it then that
would kind of become the new reality and
then the question is well what happens
if and if between 0 and 80 people are it
were an 80% if people start believing
that like what is the thing you also you
see instead if there is one of these
kind of switches happening is kind of
revolution then if you're the first
person to join then like you probably
probably don't have the incentive to do
that but then if you're the 55th
percentile person to join and then
suddenly becomes quite safe too and so
this definitely is the sort of thing
that you can and if try to analyze it
understand mathematically but one of the
and if results is that the sort of like
when the switch happens definitely can
be chaotic sometimes yeah but still like
to me the idea that the network effects
that the fact that human beings at a
scale like millions billions ensure even
the idea of currency big yeah all agree
that's just I know I can almost model it
I'm a skeptic on the economic it's like
somebody my favorite sort of field maybe
recreationally psychology is trying to
take human behavior and I think
sometimes people just kind of pretend
that they can have a grasp on human
behavior even though we it's such a
messy space that all the models that
psychology or economics those different
perspectives on human behavior you can
have or are difficult it's difficult to
know how much that's wishful thinking
and how much it is actually getting to
the core of understanding human behavior
but on that idea what do you think is
the role of money in human motivation so
do you think money from an economics
perspective from a psychology
perspective is core to like human
desires money is definitely very far
from the only motivator it is a big
motivator and that's one of the closest
things you have to a universal motivator
think because ultimately in the almost
any person in the world if you ask them
to do something they'll be more inclined
to do it if you also offer some offer
the money right and that's big there's
definitely many cases where people will
do things other than things that
maximize how much money they have and
that happens all the time but like
though a lot of those other things are
kind of but much more specific to and if
who that person is and if where their
situation is the relationship between
the motive in the action and these other
things what do you think is in the
interplay of the other motivator from
like Nietzsche perspectives power do you
think money equals power do you think
those are conflicting ideas do you think
that's the one of the ideas that
decentralized currency decentralized
applications are looking at is who holds
the power yeah money is definitely a
kind of power and there's definitely
people who want money because it gives
them power and then even if my money
doesn't seem to and have explicitly be
about money a lot of things that people
spend money on are ultimately about a
social status of some kind
I definitely view those two things as an
interplaying and then there's also money
as just a way of like measuring how
successful you are I guess a scoreboard
right so this kind of gets back to the
game like if you have four billion
dollars then the main benefit you get
from going out or one of the big
benefits you get from going up to six
million dollars is that now instead of
being below the guy who has five year
above the guy who has five so you think
money could be kind of in a game of life
it's also a measure of self-worth it's
like how we it's definitely how I have a
lot of people perceive it define
ourselves you know hierarchy of yeah I'm
not yeah not saying it's kind of a
healthy thing that people define
yourself worthless money because it's
definitely and of far from a perfect
indicator of how much you like you value
you provide the Society or anything like
this but I definitely think that they as
a matter of kind of current practice a
bunch of people do feel that way so what
does utopia from an economic perspective
look like to you what is the perfect
world look like
I guess The Economist's utopia would be
one where kind of everything is an
incentive aligns in the same in the
sense that there aren't enough conflicts
between what satisfies your goals and
kind of what is good for and if everyone
in the world in the world as a whole
what do you think that would look like
this
does that mean they're still poor people
and rich people they're still income
inequality do you think sort of Marxist
ideas are strong do you think sort of
ideas of Objectivism
like where the market rules is strong
like what is there is the different
economic philosophies that just seem to
be reflective what utopia would be no I
definitely think that existing economic
philosophy is do end up kind of
systematically deviating from the utopia
in a lot of ways yeah like one of the
big things I talk about for example is
public goods right and public goods are
especially important on the Internet
right yes like the idea is what kind of
money as this game where you know I was
a few coin a few coins and you gain the
same number of coins is that this
usually happens in a trade where I lose
some money you gain some money you lose
a sandwich and I gain a sandwich and
this and if model works really well when
the thing that were using money to
incentivize this kind of private goods
right things that you provide to one
person where the benefit comes to one
person but the like on the internet
especially but also many many contexts
and if off the internet there's actions
that and if individuals or groups can
take where instead of the benefit going
to one person the benefit just goes to
many people at the same time and you
can't control where the benefit goes to
right so for example this podcast I know
we publish it and when it's published
you don't have any fine-grained control
over like oh these 38,000 people can
watch it and then like these other
29,000 people can't it's like once the
number goes high enough then you know
people just like copy it and then when I
write articles on a blog then they're
just like free for everyone and that
stuff's even harder to prevent anyone
from copying so and aside from that
things like you know scientific research
for example and even taking more
pedestrian examples like climate change
mitigation would be a big one
so there's a lot of things in the world
where you have these kind of individual
actions with have concentrated cost and
distributed benefits and money as a
point system does not do a good job of
encouraging these things and one of the
kind of other things even tangentially
connected to crypto but kind of
theoretically outside of it that I work
on is this sort of mechanism called
quadratic funding and the way to think
about it is I and I've imagined a point
system where if like if one person gives
coin gives points to one other person
then it works the same way as money but
if multiple people and give coins to one
person and they do so anonymously so
it's kind if not in consideration for a
specific service to that person
themselves and then
the number of Quinns are received by
that person and of greater than just the
sum of the number of coins that have
given by those different people so the
actual formula is you take the square
root of the amount that each person gave
then you add all the square roots so
then you're going to square the sums
because yeah and then you give that and
the idea here would basically be that if
let's say for example you just started
going off and kind of planting a lot of
trees and there's a bunch of people that
are really happy that you're planting
trees so that so they go and all kind of
throw a coin your way then the like
there is like basically the fact that
kind of you get more than the sum you
get this kind of square of some of these
of a square root some of these tiny
amounts as that this actually and if
compensates for the tragedy of the
Commons rightness there is even this
kind of mathematical proof that it's
sort of optimally compensates for it
what is the tragedy of the Commons this
is just this idea that if there is this
situation where there's some public good
that lots of people benefit from then no
individual person wants to contribute to
it because if they contribute to only
get a small part of the benefit from
their contribution but they pay the full
cost of their contribution in which
context is this sorry what is the term
quadratic quadratic funding like what's
in which context is this mechanism
useful so obviously you said to combat
the tragedy of the Commons but you know
in which context do you see it as useful
in practice yes theoretically public
goods in general right so like like
services like what do we what are we
talking about what's the public within
the etherium ecosystem for example like
we've actually tried using this
mechanism I wrote a couple of articles
about the Senate on Vitalik CA where it
goes through some of the most recent
rounds and it's been really interesting
some of the top ones that people
supported there were things like you can
just unwind user interfaces that make it
easier for people to interact with
etherium there was documentation there
are podcasts there were you know
software and of clients like kind of
implementations of the etherium protocol
of privacy tools just like lots of
things that are gonna be useful to lots
of people wouldn't a lot of people are
contributing for like funding a
particular take care entity yeah and
it's really actually interesting is
there something special about the
quadratic the the the summing of the
square roots yeah so another way to
think about it is like imagine if n
people each give a dollar then the
person gets N squared right and and so
each individual person's contribution
gets multiplied by n because you have n
people and so that kind of perfectly
compensates for the kind that kind of
end to one tragedy over the comments I
just wonder if the squared part is yeah
fundamental though it is an Ida
recommend you go to
Vitalik CA I have this article called
quadratic payments of primer and highly
recommended it's kind of at least my
attempt so far and if exploiting the
intuition behind this intuition so if we
could can we go to the
the very basic what is the blockchain or
perhaps we might even start at the the
Byzantine generals problem and
presenting fault tolerance in general
that I big coin was taking steps to
providing a solution for so the
Byzantine generals problem it's this
paper that Leslie Lamport published in
1982 where she has thought experiments
where if you have two generals that are
camped out on opposite sides of a city
and they're planning when to attack the
city then the question is and if how
could those generals coordinate with
each other and they could send
messengers between each other but those
messengers and if could get sniped by
the enemy on the row road some of those
messages could end up being traitors and
if things could end up happening and
with just two
mess generals it turns out that there's
and if no solution and a finite number
of rounds that guarantee is dead they
will be able to end of coordinate on the
same answer but then in the case where
you have more than two generals that
then Leslie analyzes cases like are the
mess and message is kind of just oral
messages are the messages kind of signed
messages so I can give you a man
assigned messages and you can pass along
that signed message and the third party
could still verify that I originally
made that message and depending on those
different cases there's kind of
different bounds on like given how many
generals and how many traders among
those generals so I move whether like
under what conditions you actually can't
agree once I launch an attack so it's
actually a big misconception that the
the Byzantine generals problem was
unsolved so let's go import solve that
the thing that was unsolved though is
that all of these solutions assume that
you've already agreed on and I'm affixed
a list of who the generals are and these
generals have to be a kind of semi
trusted to some extent they can't just
be anonymous be
because if they're anonymous stand like
the enemy could just be 99% of the
generals uh so I'm in the 1980s and the
1990s head of the general use case for
distributed system stuff was more and if
enterprise-e stuff where you could and
have assumed that no you know who the
nodes are that are running the sign of
computer networks so if he wants to have
some movement of decentralized computer
network that pretends to be a single
computer and that you can kind of do a
do and of operations on then it's made
out of these and a fifty in specific
computers and we know and if who and
where they are and so we have a good
reason to believe that say at least
eleven of that would be fine and it
could also be within a single system yes
exactly
almost a network of devices sensors you
know on like in air airplanes and I
think like flight systems generally use
these kinds of ideas yep yep so that's
the eighties that's the eighties and
nineties now the cypherpunks had a
different use case in mind which was
that they wanted to create a yeah for a
decentralized global permission was
currency and the problem here is that
they didn't want any authorities and
they didn't even want any kind of
privilege the list of people and so now
the question is well how do you use
these techniques to create consensus
when you have no way of kind of
measuring identities right you have no
way of kind of determining whether or
not some 99% of participants aren't
actually all the same guy and so the
clever solution that's it was she had
this is and if going back to the that
presentation I made a Def Con a few
months ago where I said that the things
that o she invented was crypto economics
is this a really neat idea that you can
use economic resources to kind of all
admit identity how many identities you
can get and the if there isn't any
existing decentralized digital currency
that the only way to do this is with
proof of work right so with proof of
work the solution is just you
publish a solution to a hard
mathematical puzzle that takes some and
if clearly calculable amount of
computational power to solve you get an
identity and then you solve a five of
those puzzles you get five identities
and then these are the identities that
we run the kids not this algorithm
between so the proof-of-work mechanism
you just described is like the
fundamental idea proposed in in the
white paper that defines bitcoin what's
the idea of consensus that we wish to
reach what wise consensus important here
what is consensus so the goal here in
just simple technical terms yes to kind
of wire together a set of a large number
of computers in such a way that they
kind of pretends to the outside world to
be a single computer where that single
de pute er keeps working even if a large
portion of the kind of constituents the
computers that make it up break it kind
of break in arbitrary ways like they
could shut off they could try to
actively break a system they could do
lots of mean things so the reason why
the cypherpunks wanted to do this is
because they wanted to run one
particular program on this virtual
computer and the one particular program
that they wanted to run is just a
currency system right it's a system that
just processes a series of transactions
and for every transaction it verifies
that the sender has enough coins to pay
for the transaction it verifies that the
digital signature is correct and if the
checks pass then it subtracts the coins
from one accounts and adds the coins to
the other account roughly so first of
all the the proof of work idea is kind
of I mean at least to me seems pretty
fascinating it is I mean that's a it's
kind of a revolutionary idea is it is it
obvious to come up with that you can use
you can exchange basically computational
resources for for identity it's it
actually has a pretty long history it
was first proposed in a paper by a
Cynthia to work
in a or in 1994 I believe and the
original use case was a combating email
spam so the idea is that if you send an
email you have to send it with a
proof-of-work attached and like this
makes it reasonably cheap to send emails
to your friends but it makes it really
expensive to send spam to a million
people yeah that's a simple brilliant
idea so maybe also taking a step back so
what is the role of blockchain in this
what is blockchain sure so the
blockchain I mean my way of thinking
about it is that it is this
and if system where you have this kind
of one virtual computer created by this
a bunch of these of nodes in the network
and the reason why the term blockchain
is used is because the data structure
that these systems use at least so far
is one where they even if different
nodes in the network periodically
published blocks and a block is a kind
of list of transactions together with a
pointer like a hash of a previous block
that it builds on top of and so you have
a series of blocks that that no one's in
the network create for each block points
to the previous block and so you have
this chain of them is a fault tolerance
mechanism built into the idea of
blockchain there's a lot of
possibilities I've got a ways to make
sure there's no funny stuff going on
there are indeed a lot of possibilities
so in Egan and just simple architecture
as I just described is the way the fault
tolerance happens it's like this right
so you have a bunch of nodes and they're
just happily and if occasionally
creating blocks building on top of each
other's blocks and let's say you have
kind of one block we'll call it kind of
block one yeah and then someone else
builds another block honestly we'll call
it block two then we have an attacker
and what the attacker tries to do is the
attacker tries to revert block two and
the way the revert block two is instead
of doing the thing they're supposed to
do which is build a block on top of
block two they're gonna build another
block on top of block one so you have
block one which has two children block
two in the
walk to prime now this light sometimes
even happened by random chance
if you know two nodes in the network
just happened to create blocks at the
same time and then over here about each
other's things before they create their
own but this also could happen because
of an attack now if this happens you
have an attack then we know in the
Bitcoin system the nodes follow the
longest chain so if this attack had
happened and if when the original chain
had more than two blocks on its know if
it was trying to kind of revert more
than more than two blocks then everyone
would just taken one just ignore it and
everyone would just keep following the
regular chain but here you know we have
walked two and we have walked two prime
and snow this you were kind of even and
then whatever block the next block is
created on top of so say block three is
now created on top of block two prime
then everyone says agrees that block
three is than you had and block two
prime is just kind of forgotten and then
everyone just kind of peacefully builds
on top of block 3 anything continues so
how difficult is it to mess with the
system I know so how like if we look at
the general problem like how many what
fraction of people who participate in
the system have to be bad players in
order to mess with actually like what's
your is there is there a good number
areas well depending on kind of what
your model of the participants is and
like what kind of attack we're talking
about it's anywhere between twenty three
point two and fifty percent of what of
all of the computing power in the
network sorry so twenty two and twenty
or three point between twenty three
point zero and 50% and 50% are can be
compromised so like once you're once
your purse your portion of the total
computing power the network goes above
the twenty three point two level then
there's and if things that you could
mean things that you can potentially do
and as your percentage of the network
kind of keeps going up then the your
abilities does you mean things kind of
goes higher and then if you have
about 50% then you can just break
everything so how hard is it to achieve
that level like it seems that so far
historically speaking it's been
exceptionally difficult so this is a
challenging question so the economic
cost of acquiring that level of stuff
from scratch is fairly high I think it's
somewhere in the low billions of dollars
and when you say that stuff you mean
computational resources yeah so
specifically specialized hardware and of
Asics that people use to solve these
puzzles to do the mining small tangent
so obviously I work a lot in deep
learning with GPUs and Asics for that
application and I tangentially kind of
here that's so many of these you know
sometimes NVIDIA GPUs are sold out
uh-huh because because of this other
application that would do work if you
can come out I don't know if you're
familiar or interested in the space what
kind of Asics what kind of hardware is
generally used these days for the to do
the actual computation for the
proof-of-work
sure so in the case in Bitcoin and
etherium are a bit different so in the
case of Bitcoin there is an algorithm
called sha-256 it's just a hash function
and so the puzzle is just coming up with
a number where the hash of the number is
below some threshold and so because the
hashes are designed to be random you
just have to keep on trying different
numbers until one works and the Asics
are just like specialized store gets to
contain and if circuits for evaluating
this hash over and over again and you
have like millions or billions of these
hash evaluators and just stacked on top
of each other inside of a box and you
just keep on running the box 24/7 and
the issues there's literally specialized
hardware design for this yes oh this is
we live in an amazing world another
tangent and I'll come back to the basics
but this quantum computing throw a
wrench into any of this very good
question
so what quantum computers have two main
and a families of algorithms that are
relevance to cryptography one is a
Shor's algorithm ensures algorithm is
one of kimbley
he breaks the hardness of some specific
kinds of mathematical problems so the
one that you've probably heard of is it
makes it very easy to factor numbers so
it figure out kind of what prime factors
are they're kind of that you need to
multiply together to get some number
even if that number is extremely big
Shor's algorithm can also be used to
break and look to curve cryptography it
can break like any kind of hit an order
group so it breaks a lot of kind of
cryptographic nice things that we're
used to but the good news is that for
every and of major use of things that
Shor's algorithm breaks we already know
of quantum proof alternatives now these
we don't use these quantum proof
alternatives yet because in many cases
they're faster ten times what sufficient
but and the crypto industry in general
kind of knows that this is coming
eventually and it's kind of ready to
take the hit and switch to that stuff
when we when we have to the second
algorithm that is the relevant to
cryptography is Grover's algorithm and
in Grover's algorithm might even be a
more familiar to AI people that's
basically usually described as solving
search problems them but the idea here
is that if you have a problem over the
form find a number that satisfies some
property then if with a classical
computer you needs to try and have n
times before before you find a number
then with a quantum computer you only
need to do square root of n computations
and the Grover's could potentially be
used for mining but there's two
possibilities here
one is that Grover's could be used for
mining and whoever creates the first
working quantum computer that could do
Grover's will just mind way faster than
everyone else and we'll see another
round of what we saw when a six came out
which is that kind of the new hard were
just kind of dominated the old stuff and
then eventually it switched to a new
equilibrium but by the way way faster
not exponentially faster quadratic we
found radically faster which is not sort
of uh
it's not game-changing I would say it's
like a sex like you said it would be
exactly yes so it would not necessarily
break proof-of-work as of this right
yeah yeah the other kind of possible
world right is that quads are computers
have a lot of overhead there's a lot of
Anacapa like city involved in
maintaining quantum states and there's
also as we've been realizing recently
meeting quantum computers were actually
work requires that have quantum error
correction which requires kind of a
thousand real qubits per logical qubit
and so there's the very real possibility
that the overhead of running a quantum
computer will be higher than the
speed-up you get with Grover's which
would be kind of sad but which would
also mean that given proof of work we'll
just keep working fine so the
beautifully put soso proof of work is
the core idea of Bitcoin is there are
other core ideas before we kind of take
a step towards the origin story and
ideas of aetherium is there other stuff
that will key to the white paper of
Bitcoin there is proof of work and then
there's just the cryptography it just
kind of public keys and signatures that
are used to verify transactions those
two are the big things so then what is
the origin story maybe the human side
but also the technical side of aetherium
sure
so I joined the Bitcoin community in
2011 you know they started by just
writing I first wrote for the sort of
online thing called Bitcoin weekly then
I started writing for Bitcoin magazine
um you know sorry to interrupt you have
this funny kind of story true or not is
that you were disillusioned by the
downsides of centralized control from
your experience with Wow world of
warcraft is this true or you're just
being woody I mean the event is true the
fact that that's the reason I do
decentralization is witty maybe just a
small tangent have you always had a
skepticism of centralized control is
that sloppy Korea has that feeling
evolved over time or is that just always
been a core feeling that decentralized
control is the future of
human society it's definitely been
something that felt very attractive to
me ever since I could afford that such a
thing is possible yeah they're so great
so you're you joined the Bitcoin
community in 2011 you say you began
writing so what what's next
started writing moved from high school
to university a half way in between that
spent a year in university then at the
end of that year I had dropped out to do
Bitcoin things full-time and this was a
combination of continuing the right
Bitcoin magazine but also increasingly
work on software projects and I traveled
around the world for about six months
and just going to different Bitcoin
communities like I went to first in New
Hampshire then Spain other European
places
I'm Israel then San Francisco and along
the way and have met a lot of other
people that are working on different
Bitcoin projects and when I was in
Israel there were some kind of very
smart teams there that were working on
ideas that people were starting to kind
of called Bitcoin 2.0 so one of these
worse colored coins which is basically
saying that hey let's not just use the
blockchain for Bitcoin but let's also
kind of issue other kinds of assets on
it and then there is a protocol called
master coin that supported issuing
assets but also supported many other
things like financial contracts like
domain name registration and a lot of
different things together and I spent
some time working with these teams and I
quickly kind of realized that this
master coin protocol could be improved
by kind of generalizing it more right so
the best the analogy I use is that the
master coin protocol was like the Swiss
Army knife you have 25 different
transaction types for 25 different
applications but what I realized is that
you could replace a bunch of them with
things that are more general-purpose so
one of them was that you could replace
like three transaction types for three
types of financial contracts with a
generic transaction type for a financial
contract so just what you specify
mathematical formula for kind of
gurgi how much money each side gets by
the way it's a small pause what's you
say financial contract just the
terminology what is the contract
what's a financial contract so the a
this is just generally an agreement
where I know if either one or two
parties kind of put collateral or kind
of in and then they depending on and if
certain conditions like this could
involve prices of assets this could
involve different the actions of the two
parties could involve other things but
they you kind of get rid of different
amounts of and of assets out that it'll
just depend on things that happened so a
contract is really a financial contract
as at the core it's the it's the core
interactive element of a financial
system yeah there's there's many
different kinds of financial contracts
like there's things like options where
you kind of give someone the right to
buy a thing that you have for some
specific price for some period of time
there's contracts for difference where
you basically are kind of making a bet
that says like for every dollar this
thing goes up I'll give you $7 or for
every dollar the thing goes down you
give me $7 or something like that you
know but the main idea that these
contracts have to be enforced and
trusted then yes exactly you have to
trust that they will work out in a
system where nobody can be trusted yes
this is such a beautiful complicated
system okay so so you're seeking to kind
of generalize this basic framework of
contracts hmm so what is that entail so
what what technically are the steps to
creating aetherium sure so I guess just
they're going to continue a bit with
this master coin story term so started
by and of giving ideas for how to
generalize the thing and eventually this
turned into a much more kind of fully
fledged proposal that just says hey how
about you scrap all your future is and
instead you just put in this programming
language and I gave this idea to them
and their response was something like
hey this is great but this seems
complicated and this seems like
something that's we're not gonna be able
to put onto a road map for a while
and my response to this was like wait do
you not realize how revolutionary this
is well just go do it myself and then I
was the name of the programming approach
I just called it ultimate scripting
great so then I kind of went through a
couple more rounds of iteration and then
the idea for aetherium itself started to
form and the idea here is that you just
have a blockchain where the core unit of
the thing is what we call contracts as
these and if accounts that can hold
assets and like they have their own
internal memory but that are controlled
by a piece of code and so if I send some
ether to a contract the only thing that
can determine where that and if either
the currency inside etherium item goes
after that is the code of that contract
itself and so basically you're kind of
sending assets to computer programs
becomes this kind of paradigm for
creating these sort of agreement self
executing agreements self executing as
so cool that code is sort of part of
this contract so that that's what's
meant by smart contracts yeah so how
hard was it to build this kind of thing
harder than expected I mean originally I
actually thought that this would be a
thing that I would kind of casually work
on for a couple of months published and
then go back to university then I
released it and a bunch of people or I
released a white paper white paper that
paper a whole bunch of people came in
offering how about huge number of people
and have expressed interest and this was
something I was totally not expecting
and then I kind of realized that this
would be something that's kind of much
bigger than I had ever thought that it
would be and then we started on this
kind of much longer development slog of
making something that lives up to this
sort of much higher level of
expectations what if this some of those
is it fundamentally software engineering
challenges your whether social okay so
there's a social so so what are the
biggest interesting challenges that
you've learned about human civilization
and engine software engineering through
this process so I guess one of the
challenges for me is that like I'm one
of the I know apparently unusual geeks
course and have never treated with
anything but kindness in school yes and
so when I got into crypto I kind of
expected everyone would just kind of be
the same kind of altruistic and nice in
that same way but the and if the
algorithm that I used for finding
co-founders for this thing was not very
good it was literally what computer
scientists called the greedy algorithm
it's said of the first 15 people who
replied back offering to help and if I
were the co-founders do you mean like
literally the people that four will form
the founders cofounders of the community
the algorithm I like how you call it the
algorithm yeah and so what happened was
that these but especially as the project
got really big like there started to be
a lot of this kind of infighting and
there are a lot of like I wanted the
thing to be a non-profit and some of
them wanted to be a for-profit and then
there started to be people who were just
kind of totally unable to work with each
other there were people that were kind
of trying to get an advantage for
themselves in a lot of different ways
and this just about six months later
went to this big governance crisis and
then we got a reshuffled leadership a
bit and then the project kept on going
then nine months later there was another
governance crisis and then there was a
third governance crisis and so is there
a way to looking at the human side of
things is there a way to optimize this
aspect of the cryptocurrency world it
seems that there is from my perspective
there's a lot of different characters
and personalities and egos and like you
said I don't know if you know I also
like to think that most of the world
mostly people in the world are
well-intentioned but the way those
intentions are realised may perhaps come
off as you know as negative like what is
there is there a hopeful message here
about creating a governance structure
for cryptocurrency that where everyone
gets along and after about four rounds
of reshuffle like I think we've actually
come up with something that seems to be
pretty stable and happy and I think I
mean I definitely do think that you know
most people are well-intentioned I just
think that like one of the reasons why I
like decentralization is just because
there's like this thing about power
where power attracts people with egos
and so that just allows a very small
percentage of people to just ruin so
many things you think he goes uh you
think ego has a use like is he go always
bad it seems like sometimes does but
Scindia theory research team I feel like
we've found also kind of a lot a lot of
very good people that are just gonna
primarily you're just interested in
things for the technology and the thing
says seem to just generally be going
quite well yeah when you're when the
focus and the passion is an attack so on
the so that's the human side of things
but and the technology side like what
have you learned what would have been
the biggest challenges of bringing
aetherium to life on the technology side
so I think first of all just you know
there's like the first law of software
development which is that when someone
gives you a timetable of which the unit
of time to the next largest unit of time
and add one he's like we basically fell
victim to that and so instead of taking
this at like three months it ended up
taking like 20 months to watch the thing
that was just I think under estimating
the sheer technical complexity over the
thing
there were research challenges like so
for example
one of the things that we've been saying
from the start that we would do one is a
switch from a proof of work to a proof
of stake more proof of stake is this
alternative consensus mechanism where
instead of there having to waste a lot
of a computing power on solving these
mathematical Possible's that don't mean
anything you kind of proved that you
have access to coins inside of the
system and this gives you some level of
participation in the consensus can you
maybe elaborate on that a little bit I
understand the idea of proof of work I
know that a lot of people say that the
idea of proof of stake is really
appealing can maybe linger on a longer
explain what it is sure so basically the
idea is like if I kind of a walk up a
hundred coins then I turned that into a
kind of court virtual Minor and the
system itself I kind of automatically in
a random way assigns that in a virtual
minor is a right to create blocks at
particular intervals and then if someone
else has 200 coins and then a walk on
the walk there's 200 coins then they get
a kind of twice as big a virtual minor
they'll be able to create blocks twice
as often good so it tries to do similar
things to proof of work except instead
of the thing and if very limiting your
participation being your ability to
crank out its solutions to and if hash
challenges the thing that real love is
your participation is kind of how much
coins you're walking into this mechanism
okay so interesting so that that limit
of participation doesn't require you to
run a lot of compute mmm-hmm
does that mean that the richer you are
so rich people are more like their
identities more right and this stable
yeah verifiable or whatever whatever the
right terminology is right and this is
definitely a copied critique I think my
usual answer to this is that like proof
of work is even more of that kind of
thing exactly yeah I didn't mean it
investing there's a criticism I think
you're exactly right that's equivalent
the proof of work is the same
kind of thing but before work you have
to also use physical resources yes and
burn computers and burn trees and all of
that stuff is there a way to mess with
the system of the proof of proof of
stake there is but you will once again
need to have a very large portion of all
the coins that are locked in the system
to do anything bad
got it yeah and just to that maybe take
a small change and one of the criticisms
of cryptocurrency is the fact that it
gets for the proof of work mechanism you
have to use so much energy in the world
yes is one of the motivations of proof
of stake is to move away from this
definitely like what's your sense of it
maybe I'm just under informed is there
like legitimately environmental impact
from this yeah so the latest thing was
that Bitcoin consumed as much energy as
the country of Austria or something like
that yeah and then etherium is like
right now me only like half an order of
magnitude smaller than Bitcoin I've
heard you talking about a theorem 2.0 so
what's the what's the dream of a theorem
2.0 what's the the status of proof of
stake is the mechanism that a theory
moves towards and also how do you move
to a different mechanism of consensus
sure that within a cup of currency so
theorem 2.0 is a collection of major
upgrades that we've wanted to do to
aetherium for quite some time the two
big ones one is upper of steak and the
other is so we call sharding sharding
solves another problem with block chains
which is a scalability and what sharding
does is it basically says instead of
every participant in the network having
to personally download and verify every
transaction everybody else pins in the
network only downloads and verifies a
small portion of transactions eelain's
you kind of randomly distribute who gets
how much work and because the issue of
how the distribution is random it still
has the property that you need a large
portion of the entire network to corrupt
what's going on inside of any shard but
the system is still in a very redundant
and very secure
how hard is that to implement and how
hard is proof of stake to implement like
on a technical level yes after level
proof of stake in charting are both
challenging might say charting is a bit
more challenging the reason is that
proof of stake is can have just I
changed the causa consensus or works
sharding does both that but it's also a
change to the networking layer the
reason is that charting is kind of
pointless if at the networking layer you
still do what you do today which is you
kind of gossip everything which means
that if someone publishes something
every other node and the client Sears it
a like from on the networking layer and
so instead we have to have and if sub
networks and the ability to quickly
switch between sub networks and other
sub networks talk to each other and this
is all doable but it's say yeah more
complex architecture and it's definitely
the sort of thing that it has not yet
been done in cryptocurrencies so most
most of the networking layer in
cryptocurrency is you're shouting like
broadcast messages and this is more like
ad hoc networks like yeah you're
shouting within smaller groups small
group but do you have like a bunch of
sub note like exactly you have to switch
between ah man I'd love to see that
there's a beautiful idea so from a graph
theoretic perspective but just the
software that who's responsible is a
theorem project like the people involved
would they be implementing like what's
the actual you know this is like legit
software engineering who like how does
that work how do people collaborate
build that kind of project is this like
almost like is there a software
engineering lead is there it's like is
it legit almost like large-scale
open-source projects
yeah so we have someone named Danny Ryan
on our team has just been brilliant and
great all around and he is a kind of de
facto kind of development coordinator I
guess it's like you have to invent job
titles for this stuff as the reason is
that look we also have this unique kind
of organizational structure where they
theorem foundation itself and of does
research in-house but then the actual
implementation is
by independent teams that are separate
companies and they're located all around
the world and fun places like Australia
and and so no you can kind of just need
a bunch of and have almost non-stop cat
herding to just keep getting these
people to have talked to each other and
never kind of implement this back make
sure that everyone agrees on mind of
what what's going on and kind of how to
interpret different things so how far
into the future are we from these two
mechanisms and etherium 2.0 like what's
what's your sense of the timeline
keeping in mind the previous comment you
made about the sort of general curse of
software projects so if the REM 2.0 is
split into three phases so face gyro
just creates a proof stake network and
it's actually separate from and of proof
of the proof of work network at the
beginning just and if give it time to
grow and improve itself do people get to
choose sorry to interrupt if people get
to choose I guess yes you can think yes
I choose to move over if they want to
then phase one adds sharding but it only
adds sharding of and of data storage and
not charting of computation and then
after that there is and if the merger
phase which is where the yeah and if the
accounts kind of smart contracts like
all of the an activity and a the
existing is one system just kind of gets
cut and pasted into eighth - and then
the proof of work chain gets forgotten
and then and things all the things that
we're living there before you're just
kind of continual living inside of the
pro stake system so for timelines um
phase zero has been kind of almost fully
implemented and now it's just a matter
of a whole bunch of security auditing
and testing my own experience is that
right now it feels like right about a
phase comparable to when we were doing
the original aetherium launch when we
were maybe about four months away from
launch
that's just a hunch then that's just a
hunch yeah so how you know it took took
over a decade for people to move from
Python to to Python 3 how do you see the
move from like this phase of 0 of 4 for
different consistent mechanism do you
see there being a drastic phase shift in
people just kind of jumping to this
better mechanism so in phase 0 don't
expect too many people to do much
because in phase 0 in phase 1 then you
chain negative deliberately and it
doesn't have too much functionality
turned on it's there just like if you
want to be a proof of stake validator
you can get things started if you want
to store data for other blockchain
applications you can get started but
existing applications will largely keep
living on East one and then when the
merger happens then the merger is a
operation that happens all at once I
mean so instead of one of the benefits
of I can sense a system that Nick on the
one hand you have to coordinate the
upgrade but on the other hand the
upgrade can be coordinated so what's
Gasper FFG um Gasper FFG is their
consensus algorithm that we are using
for other proofs take is there something
interesting specific about Casper FFG
like some beautiful aspect of it that's
there is so in Casper FFG combines
together kind of two different schools
of a Kuznets algorithm design so the
general two different schools of the
design are right one is at a 50% fault
tolerant but dependent on network
synchrony so 50% faults are fault
tolerant but it's all rate up to 50% of
faults but not more but it depends on an
assumption that all of the nodes can
talk talk to each other within some
development period of time like if I
send the message you'll receive it
within a few seconds and the second of
school is 33% fault tolerant but safe
under a synchrony which me instead like
if we agree on something then that thing
is finalized and even if the network
goes horribly wonky the second after
nothing is finalized there's no way to
revert that thing
and that's fascinating how you would
make that happen it's definitely quite
clever I'd recommend the Casper FFG
paper if you just search like archive I
said like arxiv Casper FFG it's that's
the papers an archive yeah yeah who are
the authors myself and every Joel
Griffith that's awesome I take a small
tangent this idea of just putting out
white papers and papers and putting them
on archives just putting them publicly
is it is that at the core is that a
necessary component of cryptocurrencies
that the tradition started with Satoshi
nakamoto's what do you make of it like
what do you make of the future of that
kind of sharing of ideas I guess so yeah
and it's definitely something that's
like kind of mandatory for crypto
because like crypto is all about making
systems where you don't have to trust
the operators to trust that the thing
works
and so if anything behind our system
works is closed sourced and that kind of
kills the point and so there is the kind
of a sense in which the fundamental
properties of the category of the thing
we're trying to build is just kind of
forces openness but also openness just
has proven to be a really great way to
collaborate and there's actually a lot
of n of innovation and academic
collaboration that's just kind of
happened ad hoc in the crypto space the
last few years so like for example we
have this forum called the research
that's like eth our ESEA are the dots eh
and there we publish and of just ideas
in a forum that's kind of half formal
like it's halfway in between like it's
it's a kind of a text write up and then
you can have math in it but it's the
often--and of much shorter than a paper
and it turns out that the great majority
of new ideas like they're just kind of
fairly small nuggets that you can
explain and like five to ten lines that
they don't really need the whole
formality paper exactly they don't
require the kind of like ten pages of an
ax filler and so introduction conclusion
is not needed
yeah and so instead you just kind of
published the idea and then people can
go comments on it really yeah I said
great for us I think I interrupted you
was there something else on Casper
effigy that's like just Casper FFG is
just kind of combines together these two
schools and so basically it creates this
system where if you have more than 50%
that are honest then the and you have
network synchrony then the thing kind of
goes as a chain but then if network
synchrony fails then kind of the last
few blocks in the chain might be kind to
get replaced but anything that was
finalized by this side of more
asynchronous process gets I can't be
reverted and so you essentially get a
kind of best of both worlds between
those two models okay so I know what I'm
doing to them I'm currently reading the
Casper effigy paper apologize for the
romanticized question but what do you
are some or the most beautiful idea in
the world of aetherium just something
surprising something beautiful something
powerful yeah I mean I think the fact
that money can just emerge out of a
database if enough people believe in it
I think is definitely one of those
things that's up there I think one of
the things that I really love about
aetherium is also this concept of
composability so this is the idea that
if I build an application on top of
ethereum then you can build an
application that talks to my application
and you don't even need my permission
you don't even need to talk to me right
so one really fun example of this as
there was this end of game on aetherium
called that Krypto kitties the just
involve head of breeding digital cats
yes
and someone else created a game called
crypto dragons where the way you play
crypto dragons is you have a dragon and
you have to feed it crypto kitties and
they just created the whole thing just
like as an etherium contract that you
would send these these tokens that are
defined by this other etherium contract
for the interoperability to happen like
the project's didn't don't really need
sir like the teams don't really need to
talk to each other you just kind of
interface with the existing program it's
just arbitrarily composable in this kind
of ways you have different you know some
groups they could be working and so you
could see it scaling to just outside of
dragons and kitties it could be you
build like entire ecosystems of software
yeah it's kind of mean especially in the
decentralized finance space that's been
popping up in the last two years there's
been a huge amount of really interesting
things happen as a result of this is it
particularly kind of like financial
applications kind of thing yeah I mean
there's like stable coins so this is a
kind of tokens retain value I'm equal to
$1 but they're kind of backed by crypt
cryptocurrency then there's
decentralized exchanges so when as far
as the decentralized exchanges go
there's this really interesting
construction that has existed for about
one one and a half years they all called
yuna swap so what yuna swap is let's say
a smart contract that holds imbalances
of two tokens will call them token a and
token B and it maintains that invariants
that the balance of token a multiplied
by the balance of token B has to equal
the same value and so the way that you
trade against a thing is basically like
you have this kind of curve you know
like x times y equals K and yeah before
you trade it's at some points on the
curve after you tre you just like pick
some different any to any other points
on the curve and then whatever the Delta
X is that's the amount of a tokens you
provide whatever the Delta Y is that's
the amount of beads no case you get or
vice versa and that's just and then and
if the slope is I'm at the current
points on the curve and it is the price
and so that just is the whole thing and
that just allows you to have have this
exchange for tokens and even if there's
very few participants and the whole
thing is just like so simple and it's
just very easy to set up very easy to
participate in and
it just provides so much value to people
so and the the fundamental the the
distributor application infrastructure
allows that somehow yes so this is a
smart contract meeting this is all a
computer program that's just running on
areum smart contracts to her just
fascinating they are okay do you think
cryptocurrency may become the main
currency in the world one day so what do
you think we're headed in terms of the
role of currency the structure type of
currency in the world I definitely
expect fiat currencies to continue to
exist and continue to be strong and I
definitely expect had a fiat currency
stall so digitized have their own way
over the next couple of decades
what's fiat currency by the way so just
like things like US dollars like dollars
and euros and Yemen these other things
and they're backed by government's yes
but I also expect and if
cryptocurrencies to play the set of
important role in just making sure that
people always have an alternative if
fiat currency start breaking so like if
or if you're in you know some had a very
high inflation place like Venezuela for
example or if you're my country just
kind of gets cut off from like cut off
from other financial systems because of
like something the banks do a gift for
any kind of if there's even like some
major trade disruption or something
worse happens then like cryptocurrencies
are the sort of thing that just because
of their kind of global neutrality they
were just and of always there and you
can keep using them it's interesting
that you're quite humble about the
possibilities of the future of
cryptocurrency you don't think there's a
possible future where it becomes the
main set of currency because it feels
like fear it feels like the centralized
control by governments of currencies
limiting somehow maybe my naive utopian
view of the world it's a and it's
definitely very possible I'm
I think for cryptocurrencies being the
main form of value to and of work well
like did you need to have some much more
price stability than they have today and
I mean there are now stable coins and
there are kind of cryptic
cryptocurrencies that try to be more
stable than existing things like Bitcoin
and ether but and that just is a tsamina
kind of the main challenge do you think
oh that's do you think that's a
characteristic of this just being the
early days is such young concept in ten
years is nothing in the history of money
yeah I think it's a combination of two
things right one is it's it's still
early days but the other is a kind of
more durable any kind of economic
problem which is that demand for
currency is volatile right because of
like recessions booms changes to
technology lots of things and if
people's demand for how much currency
they want to hold changes and if you
have a currency that has a fixed supply
then the change in demand has to be
entirely expressed as a change in value
of the currency and so what that means
is that kind of the volatility of demand
becomes entirely translated into
volatility and ahead of prices of things
that updated in that currency but if you
have a currency where instead the supply
can change and so the supply can even go
up when there's more demands then you
have the supply and of absorbing more of
that volatility and so the price of the
currency what absorb lost some of the
volatility on that topic so Bitcoin does
have a limited supply specific things
supply yes what's what's the idea and
theorem doesn't but can you clarify just
in the comment you just made is
aetherium qualified to the kind of
currency that you're talking about and
being flexible in the supply it's a bit
more flexible but you know the thing
that you would really want is something
that's kind of specifically flexible in
a response to how valuable the currency
is and and I'd recommend you know what
get stable coins as well so like things
like dye for example
like baseball that Dai and whoa what's
stable coins is it a type of
cryptocurrency it is the type of
cryptocurrency it's um a type of
cryptocurrency that's issued by a smart
contract one of these aetherium computer
programs that where the smart contract
holds a bunch of ether and then it is
basically look that people deposit and
then it issues diane's the reason why
people deposit is because they wants to
kind of go high leverage on their ether
and so it kind of pairs these two sets
have you use there's one that wants to
bility and one that kind of wants extra
risk together with each other and it
basically creates or gives one set of
participants a guarantee that they'll be
paid that they have this asset that can
that can be later converted back into
ether but it specifically at the end of
the one dollar rate and it has some kind
of stabilizing network offense yeah yeah
it has many kinds of stabilizing
mechanisms in it
that's fascinating okay this is this
world is awesome technically just from a
scientific perspective is an awesome
world that I often don't see from an
outsider's perspective what I often see
is kind of maybe hype and a little bit
if I may say so like Charlton ISM and
you don't often see at least for my
outsider's perspective the beautiful
science of it and the engineering of it
me maybe
is there a comments you can make of who
to follow how to learn about this world
without being interrupted by the
charlatans and the hyperbole in this
space I think you need to just know the
specific just people to follow like
there's you know there's all there kind
of the cryptographers and the
researchers and there's just like even
just the etherium research crew like
myself st. grad Danny Justin none of the
other people are and then and if the
academic cryptographers and I give you
like before with this today I was at
Stanford and Stanford has the Center for
watch
research and of Dan Bonet this really
famous and great cryptographer was never
running yet and there's a lot of other
people there and there's people working
on necks your knowledge proof so for
example and Zuko from a-z caches and of
one other person that I get respect
so I think if you follow the technicals
you crawl along that yeah you just sit
with your in-group and then look at the
academics de Beaune and so on and they
just cautiously expand the network of
people who fall yeah exactly and like if
someone seems to to self-promotional
than just like remove them is there
books there so there's these white
papers and we just discussed about about
ideas being condensed into really small
parts is there books that are emerging
that are kind of good introductory
material so for a historical ones and
there's like Nathaniel poppers digital
gold which is just about the history of
Bitcoin there's like one and then
Matthew Ising announced that there's one
about the history of aetherium for
technical ones in there's injurious
Antonopoulos is mastering aetherium
great so let me ask you sort of sorry to
pull back to the the idea of governments
and decentralized currency you know
there's a tension between the
centralization of currency and the power
of nations the power of governments you
what's your sense about that tension can
is there some rule for regulation of
currency you yeah is there like is the
government the enemy of digital currency
of distributed currency or can they be
like cautious friends I mean I think the
one thing that people forget is that
it's clearly not entirely an enemy
because they think if there hadn't been
so much government regulation on and if
centralized the issuing centralized
digital currency is that like
be seeing things with people like Google
and Facebook and Twitter just kind of
issuing them left and right and then
like if that was the case then
decentralized currencies would still
appeal to some people but they
definitely would appeal to less people
than today so even in that sense I think
it's they clearly been more of a help
just and if set the stage for the end of
the existence as system of the sector in
some ways but but also and I think some
of both you know like there's definitely
things that governments and if can do in
some cases have done to I have hurt the
spread of and of growth of a of
blockchains
there's things that they've done to help
and there in some cases definitely done
a good job of and if going after
fraudulent projects and they're going
after some of the projects that have
some of their enough craziest and most
misleading marketing there's also the
possibility that governments will end up
using block chains for a lot of
different things like you know
governments do and they do a lot more
than just regulating right but there is
also the they have then if identity
records and they have kind of like
property registry is even this their own
currency is like secure big lots of
different kind of things that they're
operating and there's even blockchain
applications in a lot of those and they
can you know they can leverage
technology do a lot of good for our
societies it is a little unfortunate
that governments often lag behind in
terms of their acceptance the leverage
of technology if you look at the
autonomous vehicle space AI in general
they're they're a few years behind it'd
be nice to help them catch up that's a
that's that's the always ongoing problem
you uh met Vladimir Putin to discuss the
central experience a year you're born in
the world were you born Columbus
it's a city about 115 km/h
go I mean that's vitamin potent is a is
a central figure in this part of the
world so what was that like meeting
meeting him what was that experience
like he's taller and photos than in
person yeah that's right he's five seven
I think five eight maybe yeah
unfortunately we didn't actually again
have too much of a chance to talk to him
like I managed to see him for about one
minute at the end of this meeting and I
did get a chance to see a lot some of
the other end of government ministers
and he recommended some and some of them
are actually and if interested in trying
to use blockchains to look for various
government use cases the kind of a
little bit corruption and other things
and I have like it's hard to tell from
one conversation kind of what things are
genuine and what things are just like Oh
blotchiness cool let's do blockchain
right but you know when I when I listen
to like Barack Obama talk about
artificial intelligence there's certain
things I hear were okay so he might not
be an expert in AI but he know he like
actually studied it carefully enough to
think about it like he internal like
even if it's just reading a Wikipedia
page huh like you really thought about
what this technology means did you get a
sense that Putin or some of the
ministers like thought about blockchain
like thought about the fundamentals it's
like know like understand it intuitively
or they to old school to try to grasp it
some are old school some are more new
school
it depends it's definitely depends on
who you talk to
I mean that's an open question for me
from with Putin because witness said
yeah I don't know I've only talked to
him for about one minute so but
sometimes you can pick up sort of
insights there's a quick comment there
there about maybe you can correct me on
this but they're about 3,000
cryptocurrencies being actively traded
yes and aetherium is one of you know a
lot of people believe that there will be
the the
Cryptococcus i think bitcoin is
currently still the main cup to consoles
but out there and very likely might
become that the the main one is this
kind of diversity good in the crypto
world DC is sticking around should
though should there be a winner like
should there be some consensus globally
around bitcoin or around a theory and
like what's your what's your sense i
havent nobody think of the diversity is
good and i definitely i think also that
there's probably too many people trying
to make separate block chains so and if
right now i mean the number should
definitely be greater than one and
probably greater than two or even five
not three thousand not three thousand
yeah and also not even like forty
high-quality platforms that try to do
the same thing i mean there's definitely
this range from just like one person who
would just like wrongly thinks that you
can create a cryptocurrency in like 12
hours and doesn't even think about kind
of the community aspects of maintaining
it going to people actually trying but
only creating a really tiny one - like
scammers to people like making something
that's actually successful and then you
know there's a lot of different
categories of blockchain then you have
project in terms of what it's trying to
do in what applications it's for um and
I think the experimentation is
definitely healthy if you look at the
two world there might be a little bit
disjoints but the distributed
applications cryptocurrency and in the
world of artificial intelligence do you
see there's some overlap between these
worlds that both worried about
centralized control is there some
overlap that's interesting that you
think about do you think about AI much
yeah and I think definitely would have
thought about things like like the AI
and if control problems and a lot of
problems and all of those things do you
worry about the existential threat of AI
it's definitely one of the things I
worry about you think block there's a
lot of kind of common challenges because
in in both cases when you're ultimately
trying to do is you're trying to kind of
get a simple
system to direct a more complex system
like in the case of this as strong AI as
the idea would be that this simple
system is people and the complex system
is well whatever thing the people the
people end up and if unleashing on in
the universe that'll hopefully be a
great thing and in the case of vlog
chains and of the complex well the
simple thing is the algorithm which is a
piece of static and Foley open source
code and the more complex thing is just
then um all of the different possible
and if human actors and if the strategy
is that they yet might end up be used to
participate in the network mmm do you
think about your own mortality like what
you hope to accomplish in your life and
no I definitely I definitely think about
anything my own mortality so that's if I
give you the option to live forever
would you it depends a lot on what the
fine birds is you know if it's one of
those things where I'm gonna be a kind
of like floating through empty space for
10 to the 75 years than know if it's
forever worth of and of having you know
for fulfilling life with a new meaning
flood with with friends tend to spend
the time with we're gonna meaningful
challenges to explore and and eventually
interesting things to be working on then
I think the absolutely move as
beautifully put live forever but you'd
have to check the fine print mmm
I think there's no better way to end it
Vitalik thank you so much for talking is
so exciting to follow your work my
distance and thank you for creating a
revolutionary idea and sticking with it
and building it out and doing some
incredible engineering work and thanks
for talking today yeah thank you thanks
for listening to this conversation with
vitalik butyrin and thank you to our
sponsors expressvpn and master class
please consider supporting the podcast
by signing up to master class at master
class complex and getting expressvpn at
expressvpn comm slash Lex pod
if you enjoy this podcast subscribe on
youtube review it with five stars an
apple podcast supported on patreon or
simply connect with me on Twitter at Lex
Friedman and now let me leave you with
some words from vitalik butyrin the
thing that I often ask startups on top
of the theorem is can you please tell me
why using a theory and blockchain is
better than using Excel and if they can
come up with a good answer that's when
you know you got something really
interesting thank you for listening and
hope to see you next time
you